
--- Page 1 ---
 
 
Module 2: Data Preprocessing 
 
Types of Data, Sampling Theory, Sampling Techniques, Correlation, Feature Selection. 
Dimensionality Reduction Techniques: Projections, Eigen Value Decomposition, Principal 
Component Analysis (PCA). 
 
2.1 Types of Data 
 
Data is the collection of raw facts, measurements, or observations used for analysis, decision- 
making, and machine learning model building. 
2.1.1 Based on Nature of Values (Statistical Measurement Scales) 
 
2.1.1.1 Qualitative (Categorical) Data: 
 
 Represents categories, labels, or qualities instead of numbers. 
 Cannot be directly measured or subjected to arithmetic operations. 
 
Types: 
 
Nominal Data 
 
 Purely categorical, no order or ranking. 
 Numbers may be used as labels, but they don’t imply magnitude. 
 
Examples: 
 
Gender → Male, Female, Other 
Blood Group → A, B, AB, O 
Colors → Red, Blue, Green

--- Page 2 ---
 
 
Ordinal Data 
 
 Categorical data with a natural order or ranking. 
 The intervals between ranks are not equal or meaningful. 
 
Examples: 
 
 Education → High School < Graduate < Postgraduate 
 Customer Satisfaction → Poor < Average < Good < Excellent 
 Movie Ratings → ★, ★★, ★★★, ★★★★, ★★★★★ 
Quantitative (Numerical) Data 
 
Represents measurable quantities. 
 
Arithmetic operations (mean, variance, etc.) are valid. 
 
Types 
 
Discrete Data 
 
 Countable values, integers only. 
 No intermediate values between two points. 
 
Examples: 
 
 Number of students in a class 
 Number of cars in a parking lot 
 Goals scored in a football match 
 
Continuous Data 
 
 Can take any value within a range, including decimals/fractions. 

--- Page 3 ---
 
 
 Usually comes from measurement. 
 
Examples: 
 
 Height (175.4 cm) 
 Weight (65.8 kg) 
 Temperature (36.7 °C) 
 Time (12.58 seconds) 
 
Based on Structure 
Structured Data 
 Well-organized, stored in tables (rows & columns). 
 Easy to search and analyze. 
 
Example: Relational databases, Excel spreadsheets. 
 
Unstructured Data 
 
 No predefined organization. 
 Difficult to process with traditional methods; requires NLP, CV, etc. 
 
Example: Emails, Images, Videos, Social media posts. 
 
Semi-Structured Data 
 
 Partially structured, but not in strict table form. 
 Has tags or markers to separate data elements. 
 
Example: XML files, JSON data, NoSQL databases. 

--- Page 4 ---
 
 
Based on Time of Collection 
Cross-Sectional Data 
 Collected at a single point in time. 
 Provides a snapshot of variables. 
 
Example: Census 2021 population data, income survey at one time. 
 
Time-Series Data 
 
 Collected sequentially over time. 
 Used for trend analysis, forecasting. 
 
Example: Daily stock prices, Monthly rainfall, Yearly GDP growth. 
 
2.1.2 Other Classifications in ML 
Context Labeled Data: 
Input data with target/output labels (used in supervised learning). 
 
Example: Images with “cat” or “dog” tags. 
 
Unlabeled Data: 
 
No output labels (used in unsupervised learning). 
Example: Raw customer transaction logs. 
Balanced Data: 
 
Classes are evenly distributed. 
 
Imbalanced Data: 

--- Page 5 ---
 
 
One class heavily outnumbers others (e.g., fraud detection). 
 
2.2 Sampling Theory 
 
Sampling is a method that allows us to get information about the population based on the 
statistics from a subset of the population (sample), without having to investigate every 
individual. 
 
 
2.2.1 Need of Sampling: 
 
Sampling is done to draw conclusions about populations from samples, and it enables us to 
determine a population’s characteristics by directly observing only a portion (or sample) of 
the population. 
 Selecting a sample requires less time than selecting every item in a population 
 
 Sample selection is a cost-efficient method 
 
 Analysis of the sample is less cumbersome and more practical than an analysis of the entire population. 
Steps involved in Sampling: 
 
 

--- Page 6 ---
 
 
 
 
Let’s take an interesting case study and apply these steps to perform sampling. We recently 
conducted General Elections in India a few months back. You must have seen the public opinion 
polls every news channel was running at the time: 
Step 1: 
 
The first stage in the sampling process is to clearly define the target population. 
 
Step 2: 
 
Sampling Frame : It is a list of items or people forming a population from which the sample is 
taken. So, the sampling frame would be the list of all the people whose names appear on the 
voter list of a constituency. 

--- Page 7 ---
 
 
Step 3: 
 
Generally, probability sampling methods are used because every vote has equal value and any 
person can be included in the sample irrespective of his caste, community, or religion. Different 
samples are taken from different regions all over the country. 
Step 4: 
 
Sample Size : It is the number of individuals or items to be taken in a sample that would be 
enough to make inferences about the population with the desired level of accuracy and 
precision. Larger the sample size, more accurate our inference about the population would be. 
For the polls, agencies try to get as many people as possible of diverse backgrounds to be 
included in the sample as it would help in predicting the number of seats a political party can 
win. 
Step 5: 
 
Once the target population, sampling frame, sampling technique, and sample size have been 
established, the next step is to collect data from the sample. In opinion polls, agencies generally 
put questions to the people, like which political party are they going to vote for or has the 
previous party done any work, etc. Based on the answers, agencies try to interpret who the 
people of a constituency are going to vote for and approximately how many seats is a political 
party going to win. 
2.3 Sampling Techniques 
 
Sampling techniques are methods used to select a portion of a population to study, in order to make 
inferences about the entire population. Broadly, they are divided into two types: probability 
sampling and non-probability sampling. In probability sampling, every member of the population 
has a known and non-zero chance of being selected. Common methods include simple random 
sampling, where every member has an equal chance of selection; systematic sampling, where every 
k-th member is chosen after a random start; stratified sampling, where the population is divided 
into homogeneous groups (strata) and samples are taken from each; 

--- Page 8 ---
 
 
cluster sampling, where entire clusters are randomly selected; and multi-stage sampling, which 
combines several sampling stages. 
In non-probability sampling, not every individual has a chance of being selected, often making it 
less representative but more practical in certain situations. Examples include convenience 
sampling, where easily available subjects are selected; judgmental or purposive sampling, based 
on the researcher’s judgment; quota sampling, ensuring certain groups are represented in fixed 
proportions; and snowball sampling, where existing participants recruit others, often used for hard-
to-reach populations. Probability sampling is preferred for generalizable, unbiased results, while 
non-probability sampling is often used in exploratory or qualitative research where probability-
based methods are not feasible. 
2.3.1 Different Types of Sampling: 
 
The different types of sampling techniques are, 
 
Probability Sampling: In probability sampling, every element of the population has an equal 
chance of being selected. Probability sampling gives us the best chance to create a sample that is 
truly representative of the population. 
Non-Probability Sampling: In non-probability sampling, all elements do not have an equal 
chance of being selected. Consequently, there is a significant risk of ending up with a non- 
representative sample which does not produce generalizable results For example, let’s say our 
population consists of 20 individuals. Each individual is numbered from 1 to 20 and is 
represented by a specific color (red, blue, green, or yellow). Each person would have odds of 1 
out of 20 of being chosen in probability sampling. 
With non-probability sampling, these odds are not equal. A person might have a better chance of 
being chosen than others. So now that we have an idea of these two sampling types, let’s dive 
into each and understand the different types of sampling under each section. 

--- Page 9 ---
 
 
2.3.2 Types of Probability Sampling: 
 
2.3.2.1 Simple Random Sampling: 
 
This is a type of sampling technique you must have come across at some point. Here, every 
individual is chosen entirely by chance and each member of the population has an equal chance of 
being selected. Simple random sampling reduces selection bias. 
 
 
 
 
One big advantage of this technique is that it is the most direct method of probability sampling. 
But it comes with a caveat – it may not select enough individuals with our characteristics of 
interest. Monte Carlo methods use repeated random sampling for the estimation of unknown 
parameters. 
2.3.2.2 Systematic Sampling: 
 
In this type of sampling, the first individual is selected randomly and others are selected using a 
fixed ‘sampling interval’. Let’s take a simple example to understand this. 

--- Page 10 ---
 
 
Say our population size is x and we have to select a sample size of n. Then, the next individual 
that we will select would be x/nth intervals away from the first individual. We can select the rest 
in the same way. 
 
 
 
 
Suppose, we began with person number 3, and we want a sample size of 5. So, the next 
individual that we will select would be at an interval of (20/5) = 4 from the 3rd person, i.e. 7 
(3+4), and so on. 
3, 3+4=7, 7+4=11, 11+4=15, 15+4=19 = 3, 7, 11, 15, 19 

--- Page 11 ---
 
 
Systematic sampling is more convenient than simple random sampling. However, it might also 
lead to bias if there is an underlying pattern in which we are selecting items from the population 
(though the chances of that happening are quite rare). 
2.3.2.3 Stratified Sampling: 
 
In this type of sampling, we divide the population into subgroups (called strata) based on 
different traits like gender, category, etc. And then we select the sample(s) from these 
subgroups: 
 

--- Page 12 ---
 
 
 
 
Here, we first divided our population into subgroups based on different colors of red, yellow, 
green and blue. Then, from each color, we selected an individual in the proportion of their 
numbers in the population. We use this type of sampling when we want representation from all 
the subgroups of the population. However, stratified sampling requires proper knowledge of the 
characteristics of the population. 
2.3.2.4 Cluster Sampling: 
 
In a clustered sample, we use the subgroups of the population as the sampling unit rather than 
individuals. The population is divided into subgroups, known as clusters, and a whole cluster is 
randomly selected to be included in the study: 
 

--- Page 13 ---
 
 
 
 
In the above example, we have divided our population into 5 clusters. Each cluster consists of 4 
individuals and we have taken the 4th cluster in our sample. We can include more clusters as per 
our sample size. 
This type of sampling is used when we focus on a specific region or area. 
 
2.3.3 Types of Non-Probability Sampling: 
 
2.3.3.1 Convenience Sampling: 
 
This is perhaps the easiest method of sampling because individuals are selected based on their 
availability and willingness to take part. 
Here, let’s say individuals numbered 4, 7, 12, 15 and 20 want to be part of our sample, and 
hence, we will include them in the sample. 
 

--- Page 14 ---
 
 
 
 
Convenience sampling is prone to significant bias, because the sample may not be the 
representation of the specific characteristics such as religion or, say the gender, of the 
population. 
2.3.3.2 Quota Sampling: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In this type of sampling, we choose items based on predetermined characteristics of the 
population. 
Consider that we have to select individuals having a number in multiples of four for our sample: 
Therefore, the individuals numbered 4, 8, 12, 16, and 20 are already reserved for our sample. 
In quota sampling, the chosen sample might not be the best representation of the characteristics 
of the population that weren’t considered. 

--- Page 15 ---
 
 
2.3.3.3 Judgment Sampling: 
 
It is also known as selective sampling. It depends on the judgment of the experts when choosing 
whom to ask to participate. 
 
 
 
 
 
Suppose, our experts believe that people numbered 1, 7, 10, 15, and 19 should be considered for 
our sample as they may help us to infer the population in a better way. As you can imagine, quota 
sampling is also prone to bias by the experts and may not necessarily be representative. 
 
 
2.3.3.4 Snowball Sampling: 

--- Page 16 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I quite like this sampling technique. Existing people are asked to nominate further people 
known to them so that the sample increases in size like a rolling snowball. This method of 
sampling is effective when a sampling frame is difficult to identify. 
 
 
Here, we had randomly chosen person 1 for our sample, and then he/she recommended person 6, 
and person 6 recommended person 11, and so on. 
 
 
1->6->11->14->19 
 
There is a significant risk of selection bias in snowball sampling, as the referenced individuals 
will share common traits with the person who recommends them. 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 17 ---
 
 
 
Example: 
A city has 9 lakhs registered voters. 
A political research team wants to conduct a survey on voter preferences before elections. 
They have limited budget and time. 
They consider the following options for sampling: 
(a) Simple Random Sampling – Generate a list of all voters and randomly pick 1000 voters. 
(b) Stratified Sampling – Divide voters into strata based on age groups: 18–30, 31–50, 51+, 
and then randomly sample 400, 400, and 200 from each group. 
(c) Cluster Sampling – Randomly select 10 wards in the city and survey all voters in those 
wards. 
(d) Convenience (N-P) – Stand near a busy metro station and ask 1000 passers-by about their 
voting preferences. 
(e) Snowball Sampling – Start with 10 known voters and ask each of them to refer more voters 
until 1000 are surveyed. 
 
Questions 
(i) Which method ensures the highest accuracy of representing the entire city? 
→ Stratified or Simple Random Sampling 
(ii) Which is the cheapest and fastest? 
→ Convenience Sampling 
(iii) If the team specifically wants to understand the opinion of young voters (18–30), which 
method is suitable? 
→ Stratified Sampling 
(iv) Why does cluster sampling give misleading results in this case? 
→ Because selected clusters (wards) may not represent the entire city accurately. 
(v) If a survey is about a sensitive issue, which method can be more practical? 
→ Snowball Sampling 

--- Page 18 ---
 
 
 
 
2.4 Correlation 
 
Correlation: The degree of relationship between the variables under consideration is measure 
through the correlation analysis. 
 The measure of correlation called the correlation coefficient 
 
 The degree of relationship is expressed by coefficient which range from correlation 
 
 
 The direction of change is indicated by a sign. 
 
 The correlation analysis enable us to have an idea about the degree & direction of the 
relationship between the two variables under study. 
Correlation is a statistical tool that helps to measure and analyze the degree of relationship between 
two variables. 
Correlation analysis deals with the association between two or more variables. 
 
2.4.1 Correlation: 
 
Causation means cause & effect relation. Correlation denotes the interdependency among the 
variables for correlating two phenomenon, it is essential that the two phenomenon should have 
cause-effect relationship,& if such relationship does not exist then the two phenomenon can not be 
correlated. 
If two variables vary in such a way that movement in one are accompanied by movement in other, 
these variables are called cause and effect relationship. 
Causation always implies correlation but correlation does not necessarily implies causation. 

--- Page 19 ---
 
 
2.4.2 Types of Correlation Type-I: 
 
 
Types of Correlation Type-I: 
 
Positive Correlation: The correlation is said to be positive correlation if the values of two 
variables changing with same direction. 
Ex. Pub. Exp. & sales, Height & weight. 
 
Negative Correlation: The correlation is said to be negative correlation when the values of 
variables change with opposite direction. 
Ex. Price & qty. demanded. 
 
Direction of the Correlation: 
 
Positive relationship – Variables change in the same direction. 
(Indicated by sign; (+) or (-).) 
As X is increasing, Y is increasing 
As X is decreasing, Y is 
decreasing 
E.g., As height increases, so does weight. 
Negative relationship – Variables change in opposite directions. 
As X is increasing, Y is decreasing 

--- Page 20 ---
 
 
As X is decreasing, Y is increasing 
 
E. g., As TV time increases, grades decrease 
More examples: 
Positive relationships: 
 
 water consumption and temperature. 
 
 study time and grades. 
 
Negative relationships: 
 
 alcohol consumption and driving ability. 
 
 Price & quantity demanded 
 
2.4.3 Types of Correlation Type-II: 
 
 
 
 
Types of Correlation Type-II 

--- Page 21 ---
 
 
Simple correlation: Under simple correlation problem there are only two variables are studied. 
 
Multiple Correlation: Under Multiple Correlation three or more than three variables are studied. 
 
Ex. 
 
Partial correlation: analysis recognizes more than two variables but considers only two variables 
keeping the other constant. 
Total correlation: is based on all the relevant variables, which is normally not feasible. 
 
2.4.4 Types of Correlation Type-III: 
 
 
 
 
Types of Correlation Type-III 
 
Linear correlation: Correlation is said to be linear when the amount of change in one variable 
tends to bear a constant ratio to the amount of change in the other. The graph of the variables 
having a linear relationship will form a straight line. 
Ex    X = 1,  2,    3,    4,    5,    6,    7,    8, 
 
Y = 5, 7, 
9, 
11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 
Y = 3 + 2x 

--- Page 22 ---
 
 
Non Linear correlation: The correlation would be non linear if the amount of change in one 
variable does not bear a constant ratio to the amount of change in the other variable. 
2.4.5 Methods of Studying Correlation: 
 
 Scatter Diagram Method 
 
 Karl Pearson’s Coefficient of Correlation 
 
 
Scatter Diagram Method: 
 
Scatter Diagram is  a graph of observed plotted points where each points represents the values 
of 
X & Y as a coordinate. It portrays the relationship between these two variables 
graphically. 
A perfect positive   correlation 
 
 
 
High Degree of positive correlation: 

--- Page 23 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 24 ---
 
 
 
 
 
Advantages of Scatter Diagram: 
 
 Simple & Non Mathematical method 
 
 Not influenced by the size of extreme item 
 
 First step in investing 
the relationship between two variables 
 
 Disadvantage of scatter diagram: 
 
 Can not adopt the an exact degree of correlation 
 
Karl Pearson's Coefficient of Correlation: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 25 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Advantages of Pearson’s Coefficient: 
 
 It summarizes in one value, the degree of correlation & direction of correlation also. 
 
 Limitation of Pearson’s Coefficient: 
 
 Always assume linear relationship 
 
 Interpreting the value of r is difficult. 
 
 Value of Correlation Coefficient is affected by the extreme values. 
 
 

--- Page 26 ---
 
 
2.5 Feature Selection 
 
Feature Selection = the process of selecting the most relevant features (independent variables) from 
your dataset to improve model performance. 
 
Why needed? → To reduce overfitting, training time, noise, and improve accuracy. 
 
Example: If predicting house prices, features like location, size, number of rooms matter, but 
color of the door might not. 
Supervised vs Unsupervised Feature Selection 
1. Supervised Feature Selection 
 
Uses target labels (Y) to guide which features are important. 
 
Example: 
o Dataset → Student performance with features: study_hours, attendance, hobbies, age, 
marks. 
o Since the label (marks) is available, we can test which features strongly correlate with 
marks (study_hours, attendance) → keep those. 
2. Unsupervised Feature Selection 
 
No labels (Y). Focus is only on relationships among features. 
 
Example: 
o Dataset → Customer details without purchase info. 
o If age and income are highly correlated (redundant), we keep one of them. 
Feature Selection Methods 
1. Filter Methods 
Use statistical measures to rank or select features. 
Method 
Description 
Correlation Coefficient For numeric features — keep features highly correlated with target 
Chi-square Test 
For categorical features — measures independence between feature and target 
Information Gain 
Based on entropy; measures how much information a feature gives about target 
 
2. Wrapper Methods 
Use model performance to evaluate subsets of features. 
Method 
Description 
Forward Selection 
Start with no features → add one at a time that improves performance 

--- Page 27 ---
 
 
Method 
Description 
Backward Elimination 
Start with all features → remove least significant features step by step 
Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE) Train model → rank features → remove weakest recursively 
3. Embedded Methods 
Feature selection happens during model training. 
Model 
How it selects 
Lasso Regression 
Shrinks less important coefficients to zero 
Decision Tree 
Uses information gain for splitting, giving feature importance 
Random Forest 
Gives average feature importance from multiple trees 
 
Filter Method 
• Correlation Coefficient 
import pandas as pd   
data = {'Study hrs': [2,4,6,8,10],   
        'Attendance': [50,60,70,80,90],   
        'Age': [15,15.5,15,15,15],   
        'Marks': [60,70,80,90,95]}   
 
df = pd.DataFrame(data)   
print(df.corr()['Marks'])   
Sample Output: 
 
Study hours to marks → 0.99 
 
Attendance to marks → 0.98 
 
Age to marks → 0.1 
Output of df.corr() 
Pair 
Correlation 
Study hrs to Study hrs 
1 
Study hrs to Attendance 
0.98 
Study hrs to Age 
0.5 
Study hrs to Marks 
0.99 
Attendance to Study hrs 
0.98 
Attendance to Attendance 1 
Attendance to Age 
0.6 
Attendance to Marks 
0.96 

--- Page 28 ---
 
 
Pair 
Correlation 
Age to Study hrs 
0.5 
Age to Attendance 
0.6 
Age to Age 
1 
Age to Marks 
0.3 
Marks to Study hrs 
0.99 
Marks to Attendance 
0.96 
Marks to Age 
0.3 
Marks to Marks 
1 
Correlation Coefficient is applicable on numerical inputs and outputs. 
CH- SQUARE METHOD: 
 
 

--- Page 29 ---
 
 
 

--- Page 30 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 31 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 32 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 33 ---
 
 
 
2.6 Dimensionality Reduction Techniques: 
 
Dimensionality Reduction is reducing the number of features (variables) in a dataset while 
retaining maximum useful information. 
Dimensionality reduction techniques: Dimensionality reduction technique can be defined as, "It 
is a way of converting the higher dimensions dataset into lesser dimensions dataset ensuring that 
it provides similar information." These techniques are widely used in machine learning for 
obtaining a better fit predictive model while solving the classification and regression problems.  
Benefits of applying Dimensionality Reduction:  
 By reducing the dimensions of the features, the space required to store the dataset also gets 
reduced. 
 Less Computation training time is required for reduced dimensions of features.  
 Reduced dimensions of features of the dataset help in visualizing the data quickly.  
 It removes the redundant features (if present) by taking care of multicollinearity. 
Avoids the curse of dimensionality. 
Two classical approaches are Projections and Eigenvalue Decomposition (EVD). 
 
Types of Projection in Dimensionality Reduction 
 
Projection is the process of mapping high-dimensional data onto a lower-dimensional subspace.  
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 34 ---
 
 
 
 
We mainly discuss 3 types of projection in the context of dimensionality reduction: 
 Simple (or Feature Selection) Projection 
 Linear Projection 
 Optimal Projection (Data-driven, e.g., PCA) 
 
2.6.1.1 Simple Projection (Feature Selection) 
 
The simplest form of projection: just ignore some features and keep others. It 
assumes that not all dimensions are equally important. 
Example: If you have height, weight, and shoe size → you may just use height & weight 
and drop shoe size. 
Mathematically, 

--- Page 35 ---
 
 
 
Just drop the 3rd coordinate. 
Dataset in 3D: 
(2,4,5),(3,6,8),(4,5,9) 
 
Projecting onto (x, y): 
(2,4), (3,6),(4,5) 
 
 
Linear Projection 
 
Instead of simply dropping dimensions, we create new features as linear combinations of 
original features. 
Allows mixing information from multiple dimensions. 
 
 
 

--- Page 36 ---
 
 
 
 
This method preserves more info than just dropping coordinates. 
 
Optimal Projection (Data-driven, e.g., PCA) 
 
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) & Eigen value decomposition: 
 
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a powerful technique used in data analysis, particularly 
for reducing the dimensionality of datasets while preserving crucial information. It does this by 
transforming the original variables into a set of new, uncorrelated variables called principal 
components.  
 Principal Component Analysis is a well-known dimension reduction technique.  
 It transforms the variables into a new set of variables called as principal components. 
  These principal components are linear combination of original variables and are orthogonal.  
 The first principal component accounts for most of the possible variation of original data.  
 The second principal component does its best to capture the variance in the data.  
 There can be only two principal components for a two-dimensional data set. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 37 ---
 
 
The steps involved in PCA Algorithm are as follows – 
 Step-01: Get data.  
Step-02: Compute the mean vector (µ). 
 Step-03: Subtract mean from the given data.  
Step-04: Calculate the covariance matrix.  
Step-05: Calculate the eigen vectors and eigen values of the covariance matrix.  
Step-06: Choosing components and forming a feature vector. 
 Step-07: Deriving the new data set.  
 
PROBLEM: Given data = { 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 ; 1, 5, 3, 6, 7, 8 }. Compute the principal component using 
PCA Algorithm. 
 
OR 
Consider the two dimensional patterns (2, 1), (3, 5), (4, 3), (5, 6), (6, 7), (7, 8). Compute the principal 
component using PCA Algorithm. 
OR 
 Compute the principal component of following data-  
CLASS 1 = X = 2 , 3 , 4 ; Y = 1 , 5 , 3 
CLASS 2 = X = 5 , 6 , 7 ;  Y = 6 , 7 , 8 
 
Step-01: Get data. The given feature vectors are- 
x1 = (2, 1)  
x2 = (3, 5)  
x3 = (4, 3) 
x4 = (5, 6)  
x5 = (6, 7) 
x6 = (7, 8) 
  
 
 
Step-02: Calculate the mean vector (µ).  
Mean vector (µ) = ((2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7) / 6, (1 + 5 + 3 + 6 + 7 + 8) / 6) = (4.5, 5) 
 
 
 
 
 
Step-03: Subtract mean vector (µ) from the given feature vectors. 
 
  x1 – µ = (2 – 4.5, 1 – 5) = (-2.5, -4) 

--- Page 38 ---
 
 
  x2 – µ = (3 – 4.5, 5 – 5) = (-1.5, 0)  
  x3 – µ = (4 – 4.5, 3 – 5) = (-0.5, -2)  
  x4 – µ = (5 – 4.5, 6 – 5) = (0.5, 1)  
  x5 – µ = (6 – 4.5, 7 – 5) = (1.5, 2)  
  x6 – µ = (7 – 4.5, 8 – 5) = (2.5, 3) 
 
Feature vectors (xi) after subtracting mean vector (µ) are- 
 
 
 
 
Step-04: Calculate the covariance matrix. Covariance matrix is given by- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Covariance matrix = (m1 + m2 + m3 + m4 + m5 + m6) / 6 
 On adding the above matrices and dividing by 6, we get- 

--- Page 39 ---
 
 
  
 
Step-05: Calculate the eigen values and eigen vectors of the covariance matrix. 
 λ is an eigen value for a matrix M if it is a solution of the characteristic equation |M – λI| = 0.  
So, we have- 
 
 
 
From here, (2.92 – λ)(5.67 – λ) – (3.67 x 3.67) = 0 
 16.56 – 2.92λ – 5.67λ + λ2 – 13.47 = 0  
λ2 – 8.59λ + 3.09 = 0 
Solving this quadratic equation,  
we get λ = 8.22, 0.38  
Thus, two eigen values are λ1 = 8.22 and λ2 = 0.38. 
 the second eigen value is very small compared to the first eigen value. 
 So, the second eigen vector can be left out. 
 Eigen vector corresponding to the greatest eigen value is the principal component for the given data set.  
So we find the eigen vector corresponding to eigen value λ1.  
We use the following equation to find the eigen vector  - 
 MX = λX where   -  
 M = Covariance Matrix  
 X = Eigen vector  
 λ = Eigen value 
Substituting the values in the above equation, we get- 
 
 
Solving these, 
 we get-  

--- Page 40 ---
 
 
 
2.92X1 + 3.67X2 = 8.22X1  
3.67X1 + 5.67X2 = 8.22X2 
 On simplification,  
we get  - 
 5.3X1 = 3.67X2 ………(1)  
3.67X1 = 2.55X2 ………(2) 
 
 From (1) and (2), X1 = 0.69X2 From (2), the eigen vector is – 
 
 
The above can be further normalized: 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 41 ---
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 42 ---
 
 
 
 

--- Page 43 ---
 
 
 
 

--- Page 44 ---
 
 
 
